Docs: what's new for preventing manual role updates (#72279)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/whatsnew/whats-new-in-v10-1.md

To avoid overriding manually set roles, enable the `skip_org_role_sync` option in the Grafana configuration for your OAuth provider before the user logs in for the first time.

### Preventing manual role updates for externally synced roles

<!-- Ieva Vasiljeva, AuthNZ -->

_Generally available in Grafana Open Source, Enterprise, and Cloud._

This change impacts all instances that use an external authentication provider and have [role mapping]({{< relref "../setup-grafana/configure-security/planning-iam-strategy/#role-sync" >}}) enabled.

Currently, it is possible to manually update a user's organization role (Viewer, Editor or Admin) even if this role is managed by an external authentication provider.
This means that roles can be manually set for the duration of a user's session, but are overridden by the external authentication provider the next time when the user logs in.

With Grafana 10.1, you can no longer manually update an externally managed organization role. Role locking was previously behind `onlyExternalOrgRoleSync` feature toggle.

> We have removed this feature toggle with Grafana 10.1, and made externally synced role locking the default behaviour.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
```suggestion
We have removed this feature toggle with Grafana 10.1. By default, the organization role of users authenticated by an external provider is locked.
```
